Current implementation notes
============================

llambda is a Windows-focused Common Lisp runtime that parses GGUF files and
runs supported quantized language models directly in SBCL.  It does not call
llama.cpp or another inference library.

GGUF access
-----------

The active inference path opens files with CreateFileW and maps them read-only
with CreateFileMappingW and MapViewOfFile.  The GGUF parser reads the header,
metadata, tensor dimensions, type tags, and aligned data offsets from that
mapping.

The model is not copied wholesale into the Lisp heap and the main inference
path does not require forged Lisp arrays.  Matrix-vector kernels address each
tensor row in the mapped file and decode or dequantize it while computing the
dot product.  Small vector tensors such as normalization weights and RoPE
factors are loaded into single-float Lisp arrays on demand and cached by
gguf-model.

Supported tensor encodings are F32, F16, BF16, Q5_0, Q8_0, Q4_K, Q5_K, and
Q6_K.  Q4_K, Q5_K, and Q6_K matrix-vector operations use specialized kernels;
the Q4_K and Q6_K hot loops use SBCL AVX2/FMA SIMD.  Large row sets run through
a persistent lparallel kernel (24 workers by default, enabled at 96 rows).

Performance limitations
-----------------------

Token generation is primarily limited by memory bandwidth rather than floating
point throughput.  Each autoregressive step streams most of the model weights
from memory, while performing comparatively little arithmetic per weight.  Once
the worker threads saturate the memory bus, adding cores or arithmetic
instructions cannot materially improve throughput.  In particular,
parallelizing dot-product rows does not produce a linear speedup: additional
workers initially improve throughput, but the gains taper off once they
collectively exhaust available memory bandwidth.

The quantized kernels therefore consume packed weights directly from the mapped
GGUF file and unpack each block as part of the dot product.  Unpacking 4-, 5-,
or 6-bit values in registers is cheaper than first expanding the model to
32-bit floats and then fetching those floats from memory.  Pre-dequantization
would increase the weight traffic by several times, require a much larger
working set, and reduce effective cache capacity.  The saved memory bandwidth
more than compensates for the integer bit extraction, scale reconstruction,
and float conversion performed by the fused kernels.

Vectorized dot-product inner loop
---------------------------------

The Q4_K and Q6_K dot-product kernels use SBCL's sb-simd AVX2 and FMA
operations explicitly.  Their expansion macros unroll the block body at compile
time, so the generated inner loop does not dispatch on tensor formats or walk a
generic sequence of quantized values.

Each f32.8 value holds eight single-precision lanes.  The Q4_K loop reads eight
packed bytes, extracts their low and high nibbles, converts those quantized
values into two eight-lane float vectors, and applies the block scales and
minimum offsets with packed arithmetic.  It loads the corresponding activation
values eight at a time with f32.8-aref, then uses nested f32.8-fmadd operations
to multiply both weight vectors and accumulate them into the same eight-lane
running sum.

The Q6_K loop follows the same pattern, reconstructing four groups of signed
six-bit values from the low-nibble and high-bit streams.  Four packed weight
vectors and four packed activation vectors feed a chain of fused
multiply-adds.  Keeping eight independent partial sums in vector registers
avoids a scalar reduction after every group; f32.8-horizontal+ reduces the
accumulator only once after all blocks in a tensor row have been processed.

Aggressive type declarations and the `(speed 3) (safety 0)` policy keep the hot
path on unboxed single floats and fixnums, allowing SBCL to emit packed AVX2
loads, arithmetic, and FMA instructions without generic arithmetic or
per-element array dispatch.  This maximizes computation performed per memory
transaction, although total model throughput still reaches the memory-bandwidth
ceiling described above.

Representative SBCL disassembly
-------------------------------

The following excerpt was produced on Windows x86-64 with SBCL 2.6.5 by
evaluating:

    (disassemble #'llambda::dot-product-with-q4-k-m-tensor-data)

Addresses and register allocation can change between builds, but this section
is the generated body for one unrolled Q4_K group.  The first pair of
VMULPS/VSUBPS instructions applies a block scale and minimum offset to an
eight-lane weight vector.  The second pair does the same for the other nibble
stream, after which two VMOVUPS instructions load 16 activations and two
VFMADD213PS instructions accumulate both products.

    ; B895: C4E36518C101     VINSERTF128 YMM0, YMM3, YMM1, 1
    ; B89B: C5FC59C6         VMULPS YMM0, YMM0, YMM6
    ; B89F: C57C5CFF         VSUBPS YMM15, YMM0, YMM7
    ...
    ; B954: C4E36518C101     VINSERTF128 YMM0, YMM3, YMM1, 1
    ; B95A: C4C17C59C0       VMULPS YMM0, YMM0, YMM8
    ; B95F: C4C17C5CD1       VSUBPS YMM2, YMM0, YMM9
    ; B964: 488B46F9         MOV RAX, [RSI-7]
    ; B968: 488D4F0E         LEA RCX, [RDI+14]
    ; B96C: 4839C8           CMP RAX, RCX
    ; B96F: 0F864E2A0000     JBE L3
    ; B975: C5FC104C7E01     VMOVUPS YMM1, [RSI+RDI*2+1]
    ; B97B: 488D4740         LEA RAX, [RDI+64]
    ; B97F: 488B4EF9         MOV RCX, [RSI-7]
    ; B983: 488D500E         LEA RDX, [RAX+14]
    ; B987: 4839D1           CMP RCX, RDX
    ; B98A: 0F86382A0000     JBE L4
    ; B990: C5FC105C4601     VMOVUPS YMM3, [RSI+RAX*2+1]
    ; B996: C46275A8FC       VFMADD213PS YMM15, YMM1, YMM4
    ; B99B: C4C265A8D7       VFMADD213PS YMM2, YMM3, YMM15
    ; B9A0: C5FC28E2         VMOVAPS YMM4, YMM2

The integer instructions between the vector operations are SBCL's array bounds
checks and address calculations for the two activation loads.  The key
throughput property is that each pair of FMA instructions advances 16 scalar
products while retaining the running accumulator in a YMM register.

This tradeoff applies to large matrix weights that are streamed for every
token.  Small vectors such as normalization weights are still converted to
single-float arrays and cached because they are repeatedly reused and readily
fit in cache.

Inference architecture
----------------------

test-gguf-file-response is the end-to-end entrypoint.  It maps the GGUF,
selects a loader from general.architecture, constructs a model-specific step
function, tokenizes and evaluates the prompt, and samples continuation tokens.

The current architecture loaders and forward passes are:

  * Gemma 4, including sliding/global attention, shared KV layers, optional
    per-layer embeddings, Gemma BPE, and Gemma chat formatting.
  * Llama 3.1, including grouped-query attention, scaled RoPE, SwiGLU, the
    llama-bpe pre-tokenizer, GPT-2 byte-level BPE, and instruct chat formatting.
  * Qwen2, including grouped-query attention with Q/K/V biases, SwiGLU, the
    Qwen2 byte-level BPE pre-tokenizer, and ChatML-style prompt formatting.
  * Qwen3Next, including its hybrid attention/recurrent layers and MoE path.
  * Nemotron-H MoE, including attention, recurrent SSM, and routed FFN layers.

Autoregressive state is caller-owned in the KV-cache hash table.  Step
functions close over a compute-buffer and reuse single-float vectors, fixnum
vectors, and displaced head views to avoid repeated allocation.  Prompt
evaluation suppresses vocabulary-logit computation until the final prompt
token.

Sampling supports repetition penalty, top-k, top-p, temperature, architecture
specific stop tokens, and streamed detokenization.

Experimental Ryzen AI NPU path
------------------------------

The CPU implementation remains the default runtime.  An optional native
llambda_npu.dll bridge now provides a flat C ABI over ONNX Runtime and AMD's
VitisAI execution provider.  Lisp loads the matching ONNX Runtime before the
bridge, probes provider availability, creates fixed-shape sessions, and passes
single-float array storage directly through CFFI.  The bridge disables ONNX
Runtime's CPU execution-provider fallback, so a graph that cannot run on the
NPU cannot produce a misleading successful NPU benchmark.

The high-level inference entrypoint requires :use-npu t in addition to an
explicit tensor or layer selection.  Without that flag it neither loads the
bridge nor creates NPU sessions.  Missing hardware, a disabled provider, a
missing bridge or ONNX Runtime, conversion failure, and session-creation errors
produce a warning and leave the complete model on the CPU.  If the native
bridge reports an error during a matrix operation, llambda removes that
projection, warns once, and immediately recomputes the same operation with the
packed CPU kernel.  The provider's internal CPU fallback stays disabled; the
fallback is explicit in llambda and therefore cannot disguise whether a graph
actually ran on the NPU.

Each gguf-model has an opt-in table of NPU projections keyed by GGUF tensor
name.  register-model-npu-projection validates the ONNX input and output sizes
against the tensor's columns and rows.  The ordinary
gguf-model-matrix-vector-multiply-into path uses a registered session and
otherwise retains the existing AVX2 implementation.  Sessions are persistent
to avoid recompiling graphs for each token and must be released with
clear-model-npu-projections.

The initial hardware validation used an AMD Ryzen AI 9 HX PRO 370 with the
DEV_17F0 XDNA2 NPU, Ryzen AI Software 1.7.1, and its ONNX Runtime 1.23.3 build.
AMD's quicktest and the same model through the CFFI bridge both completed on
VitisAIExecutionProvider.  With CPU fallback disabled, a synthetic BF16
5120-by-5120 projection took about 15.3 seconds to create its first session and
averaged 1.63 ms over 20 warm runs.  The current packed Q4_K AVX2 kernel
averaged 3.24 ms for blk.0.attn_output.weight of the 5120-wide Qwen2 test
model.  This is promising but is not yet an end-to-end speedup: the NPU test
used preconverted BF16 weights and excluded GGUF conversion, cache storage,
whole-model NPU memory pressure, and token-generation scheduling.

The complete exporter-to-CFFI path was also checked with the real
blk.0.attn_k.weight Q4_K tensor from that Qwen2 model.  After conversion to a
1024-by-5120 BF16 Gemm graph, its NPU output differed from the direct packed
Q4_K CPU result by at most 0.000442 and by 0.000089 on average for the test
input.  This difference is the expected additional BF16 rounding.

export-model-npu-projection provides the first conversion path.  It
dequantizes a selected two-dimensional GGUF tensor one row at a time, rounds
the values to BF16, and invokes native/generate-matmul-model.py to embed those
row-major weights in a fixed-shape ONNX Gemm graph.  The temporary raw BF16
stream is removed after the ONNX file is written, while the caller-selected
ONNX path remains available for later sessions.

ensure-model-npu-projection adds automatic content-addressed cache management.
The native bridge computes SHA-256 directly over the packed mapped tensor, and
the cache key also includes dimensions, GGML type, bridge version, generator
SHA-256, and ONNX Runtime version.  The generated ONNX graph is reused without
repeating GGUF dequantization.  Graph export writes a unique sibling temporary
file and uses MoveFileExW with replace and write-through flags only after
generation succeeds.  enable-model-npu-projections applies this operation to
an explicit tensor list and transactionally removes sessions it added if a
later tensor fails.

Ryzen AI Software 1.7.1 accepted cacheDir/cacheKey provider options but did not
emit reusable compiler artifacts for these generated BF16 Gemm graphs in the
tested configuration.  Reopening the same cached ONNX graph still took about
10.2 seconds because VitisAI compiled it again.  Persistent sessions therefore
remain essential: conversion is cached across processes, while compilation is
amortized across all token steps in one model lifetime.

INT8 conversion may reduce NPU weight storage further if its accuracy and
conversion cost are acceptable.  Per-row dispatch remains deliberately
unsupported; only complete projections are large enough to amortize submission
and synchronization.  The next integration step is architecture-aware
selection of a bounded set of projections and end-to-end inference benchmarks;
blindly converting every tensor would roughly expand quantized model storage
to BF16 size and create hundreds of expensive VitisAI sessions.

model-npu-layer-projection-names therefore selects an explicit bounded set by
layer and role, validating every resulting tensor against the loaded
architecture.  test-gguf-file-response accepts those layer selections or raw
tensor names, enables the sessions before prompt evaluation, and releases them
when generation exits.  A real Qwen2 prompt completed through this end-to-end
path with blk.0.attn_k.weight routed to the NPU and all other projections left
on the CPU.

Forged-array experiment
-----------------------

copy-tensors-to-aligned-temp-file and map-gguf-tensors-to-aligned-arrays remain
in llambda.lisp as an experimental alternative.  They copy tensors into
64-KiB-aligned chunks of a temporary mapped file, reserve 16 bytes for an SBCL
array header, and use SBCL internals to expose the mapped payload as arrays.

That experiment is not used by the model loaders or forward-pass step
functions.  It is SBCL- and Windows-specific, duplicates tensor storage, and
requires the returned views, mapping handle, and file handle to remain alive
until the caller explicitly cleans them up.
